---
layout: post
title: "Cross GCC for Renesas RX"
category: posts
posted_by: dbaba
---
I've just succeeded in compiling cross compilation environment for RX on OSX (10.8.5). The [codingcipher's great posts](http://codingcipher.wordpress.com/category/compilers/) gave me a lot of helpful info.

Hope this post helps developers who are going to build RX cross compiler.

## KPIT GNU Tools

First of all, you need to get KPIT GNU Tools from the [site](http://www.kpitgnutools.com/). You are required to sign up the site in order to download the tools.

The sign up process may take a couple of hours to be completed as KPIT guys verifies the sign up.

## Installing GCC 4.8.2 on OSX

In order to compile KPIT GNU Tools, I used the latest GCC as the XCode bundled GCC is too old and no longer maintained.

In this step, I was going with MacPorts.

    sudo port selfupdate

Install GCC 4.8.2 with `+universal`. The option is required in order to allow gcc to compile with 32bit libraries.

    sudo port install gcc48 +universal

Building gcc requires GMP, MPFR and MPC.

    sudo port install gmp mpfr libmpc

FYI: Here is a list of installed packages on my machine:

* gmp    @5.1.2
* mpfr   @3.1.1-p2
* libmpc @1.0.1
* gcc48  @4.8.2
* libgcc @4.8.2

## Directory Structure

	rx-elf
	  `- src
	  |    `- binutils-2.23.1
	  |    `- gcc-4.7.3
	  |    `- newlib-2.0.0
	  |    `- gdb-7.5
	  |- build
	  |    `- binutils
	  |    `- gcc
	  |    `- newlib
	  |    `- gdb
	   `- prefix

## Local Variables

Where the toolchain is placed (you can modify `$HOME/Documents/Dev`):

	PREFIX=$HOME/Documents/Dev/rx-elf/prefix

Where the downloaded source codes are placed (you can modify `$HOME/Downloads`):
	
	DOWNLOADS=$HOME/Downloads

MThe target is Renesas RX:

	TARGET=rx-elf
	
Where GMP/MPFR/MPC are installed (MacPorts install them to `/opt/local`):

	GMP=/opt/local
	MPFR=/opt/local
	MPC=/opt/local

## Building Steps

Creating directories and unarchive source codes.

	mkdir -p $HOME/Documents/Dev/rx-elf
	mkdir src build prefix
	cd src
	tar jxf $DOWNLOADS/newlib-2.0.0_rx_v13.01.tar.bz2
	tar jxf $DOWNLOADS/binutils-2.23.1_rx_v13.01.tar.bz2
	tar jxf $DOWNLOADS/gcc-4.7.3_rx_v13.01.tar.bz2
	tar jxf $DOWNLOADS/gdb-7.5_rx_v13.01.tar.bz2
	cd ../build
	mkdir binutils gcc newlib gdb

Building binutils. You need to add the binutils binaries path to `PATH`. 

	cd binutils
	../../src/binutils-2.23.1/configure --target=$TARGET --prefix=$PREFIX --disable-werror
	make
	make install
	export PATH=$PREFIX/bin:$PATH

First trial for gcc building.

	cd ../gcc
	../../src/gcc-4.7.3/configure --enable-languages=c,c++ --target=$TARGET --with-newlib \
	--prefix=$PREFIX --disable-libstdcxx-pch  --disable-multilib --with-newlib --disable-nls \
	--disable-libgfortran --with-gmp=$GMP --with-mpfr=$MPFR --with-mpc=$MPC CC=gcc

`CC=gcc` is required as newlib tries to use `rx-elf-cc` to compile sources though it is missing.

	make

Here, you'll get errors as follows (showing last 4 lines).

	(snip)
	checking for stdalign.h... no
	checking for the value of EOF... configure: error: computing EOF failed
	make[1]: *** [configure-target-libstdc++-v3] Error 1
	make: *** [all] Error 2

However, ignore here and go next.

	make install

Again, you'll get errors like this.

	(snip)
	make[2]: *** No rule to make target `install'.  Stop.
	make[1]: *** [install-target-libstdc++-v3] Error 2
	make: *** [install] Error 2

You can ignore them.

Building newlib.

	cd ../newlib
	../../src/newlib-2.0.0/configure --enable-newlib-hw-fp --target=$TARGET --prefix=$PREFIX CC=gcc
	make
	make install

Now return to gcc and the make commands will be successful this time.

	cd ../gcc
	make
	make install

Finally, building gdb. This is not mandatory so you can skip it.

	cd ../gdb
	../../src/gdb-7.5/configure --target=$TARGET --prefix=$PREFIX --disable-werror
	make
	make install
